= Schedule Tutorial

<em> This tutorial assumes you are familiar with use of the Runt API to
create temporal expressions. If you're unfamiliar with how and why to write
temporal expressions, take a look at the temporal expression 
tutorial[http://runt.rubyforge.org/doc/files/doc/tutorial_te_rdoc.html].</em>

In his paper[http://martinfowler.com/apsupp/recurring.pdf] about recurring 
events, Martin Fowler also discusses a simple schedule API which is used, 
surprisingly enough, to build a schedule. We're not going to cover the pattern 
itself in this tutorial as Fowler already does a nice job. Because it is such 
a simple pattern (once you invent it!), you'll be able understand it even if 
you decide not to read his paper[http://martinfowler.com/apsupp/recurring.pdf].

So, let's pretend that I own a car. Since I don't want to get a ticket, I 
decide to create an application which will tell me where and when I can park 
it on my street. (Since this is all make believe anyway, my car is a late 60's 
model black Ford Mustang with flame detailing (and on the back seat is one 
million dollars)). 

We'll build a Runt Schedule that models the parking regulations. Our app 
will check this Schedule at regular intervals and send us reminders to 
move our car so we don't get a ticket. YAY!

First, let's visit the exciting world of NYC street cleaning regulations.
Let's pretend the following rules are in place for our block:

* For the north side of the street, there is no parking Monday, Wednesday, or Friday, from 8am thru 11am

* For the south side of the street, there is no parking Tuesday or Thursday between 11:30am and 2pm

Thus...
    
  #############################   #############################
  #                           #   #                           #                             
  #       NO PARKING          #   #       NO PARKING          #                            
  #                           #   #                           #                            
  #  Mon, Wed, Fri 8am-11am   #   #  Tu, Th 11:30am-2:00pm    #                            
  #                           #   #                           #                            
  #                           #   #                           #                             
  #  Violators will be towed! #   #  Violaters will be towed! #                            
  #                           #   #                           #                            
  #############################   #############################                          
              # #                              # #
              # #                              # #
              # #                              # #

    North side of the street      South side of the street


We'll start by creating temporal expressions which describe the verboten 
parking times: 


  north_expr = (DIWeek.new(Mon) | DIWeek.new(Wed) | DIWeek.new(Fri)) & REDay.new(8,00,11,00)
    
  south_expr = (DIWeek.new(Tue) | DIWeek.new(Thu)) & REDay.new(11,30,14,00)    

 
What we need at this point is a way to write queries against these expressions 
to determine whether we need to send a reminder. For this purpose, we can use 
a Schedule and an associated Event, both of which are supplied by Runt.

  schedule = Schedule.new

A Schedule holds zero or more Event/TemporalExpression pairs, allowing clients
to easily query and update TemporalExpressions as well perform certain range
operations as we will see in a moment. We'll create two events, one for each 
side of the street:

  north_event = Event.new("north side")
  
  south_event = Event.new("south side")

Now we add each event and its associated occurrence to our Schedule:

  schedule.add(north_event, north_expr)

  schedule.add(south_event, south_expr)

An Event is simply a container for domain data. Although Runt uses Events 
by default, Schedules will happily house any kind of Object. Internally, a 
Schedule is really just a Hash where the keys are whatever it is you are 
scheduling and the values are the TemporalExpressions you create.

  class Schedule
  ...

    def add(obj, expression)
      @elems[obj]=expression
    end
  ...

Now that we have a Schedule configured, we need something to check it and 
then let us know if we need to move the car. For this, we'll create a simple
class called Reminder which will function as the "main-able" part of 
our app. 

We'll start by creating an easily testable constructor which will be passed
a Schedule instance (like the one we just created) and an SMTP server. 

   
  class Reminder
    
    attr_reader :schedule, :mail_server
  
    def initialize(schedule,mail_server)
      @schedule = schedule
      @mail_server = mail_server
    end
  ...

Being devoted Agilists, we'll of course also create a unit test to 
help flesh out the specifics of our new Reminder class. We'll create
test fixtures using the Runt Objects described above.


  class ReminderTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
  
    include Runt
  
    def setup
      @schedule = Schedule.new
      @north_event = Event.new("north side of the street will be ticketed")
      north_expr = (DIWeek.new(Mon) | DIWeek.new(Wed) | DIWeek.new(Fri)) & REDay.new(8,00,11,00)  
      @schedule.add(@north_event, north_expr)
      @south_event = Event.new("south side of the street will be ticketed")
      south_expr = (DIWeek.new(Tue) | DIWeek.new(Thu)) & REDay.new(11,30,14,00)
      @schedule.add(@south_event, south_expr)
      @mail_server = MailServer.new
      @reminder = Reminder.new(@schedule, @mail_server)
      @saturday_at_10 = PDate.min(2007,11,24,10,0,0)
      @monday_at_10 = PDate.min(2007,11,26,10,0,0)
      @tuesday_at_noon = PDate.min(2007,11,27,12,0,0)
    end

    def test_initalize
      assert_same @schedule, @reminder.schedule, "Expected #{@schedule} instead was #{@reminder.schedule}"
      assert_same @mail_server, @reminder.mail_server, "Expected #{@mail_server} instead was #{@reminder.mail_server}"
    end
  ...

For the purposes of this tutorial, the mail server will simply be a stub to 
illustrate how a real one might be used.

  class MailServer

    Struct.new("Email",:to,:from,:subject,:text)

    def send(to, from, subject, text)
      Struct::Email.new(to, from, subject, text)
      # etc... 
    end

  end

Next, let's add a method to our Reminder class which actually checks our 
schedule using a date which is passed in as a parameter.
  
  class Reminder
  ...
  def check(date)
    return @schedule.events(date)
  end
  ...

The Schedule#events method will return an Array of Event Objects for any 
events which occur at the date and time given by the method's argument. Usage
is easily demonstrated by a test case which makes use of the fixtures created
by the TestCase#setup method defined above.

  class ReminderTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
    ...
    def test_check
      assert_equal 1, @reminder.check(@monday_at_10).size, "Unexpected size #{@reminder.check(@monday_at_10).size} returned"
      assert_same @north_event, @reminder.check(@monday_at_10)[0], "Expected Event #{@north_event}. Got #{@reminder.check(@monday_at_10)[0]}."
      assert_equal 1, @reminder.check(@tuesday_at_noon).size, "Unexpected size #{@reminder.check(@tuesday_at_noon).size} returned"
      assert_same @south_event, @reminder.check(@tuesday_at_noon)[0], "Expected Event #{@south_event}. Got #{@reminder.check(@tuesday_at_noon)[0]}."
      assert @reminder.check(@saturday_at_10).empty?, "Expected empty Array. Got #{@reminder.check(@saturday_at_10)}"
    end
    ...


There are other methods in the Schedule API which allow a client to query for
information. Although we don't need them for this tutorial, I'll mention two 
briefly because they are generally useful. The first is Schedule#dates
which will return an Array of PDate Objects which occur during the DateRange
supplied as a parameter. The second is Schedule#include? which returns a 
boolean value indicating whether the Event occurs on the date which are both 
supplied as arguments.

Next, let's make use of the mail server argument given to the Reminder class
in it's constructor. This is the method that will be called when a call to the
Reminder#check method produces results.

  class Reminder
    ...
    def send(date)
      text = "Warning: " + events.join(', ')
      return @mail_server.send(TO, FROM, SUBJECT, text)
    end
    ...

Testing this is simple thanks to our MailServer stub which simply regurgitates
the text argument it's passed as a result.


  class ReminderTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
    ...
    def test_send
      params = [@north_event, @south_event]
      result = @reminder.send(params)
      assert_email result, Reminder::TEXT + params.join(', ')
    end
    ...

Now, let's tie the whiole thing together with a method which which checks for
occuring Events and (upon finding some) sends a reminder. This method is 
really the only one in the Reminder class that needs to be public.

  class Reminder
    ...
    def run(date)
      result = self.check(date)
      self.send(result) if !result.empty?
    end
    ...

  class ReminderTest < Test::Unit::TestCase
    ...
    def test_send
      params = [@north_event, @south_event]
      result = @reminder.send(params)
      assert_email result, Reminder::TEXT + params.join(', ')
    end
    ...

Finally, we'll cheat a bit and stitch every thing together so it can be run 
from a command line.

 
  include Runt

  schedule = Schedule.new
  north_event = Event.new("north side")
  north_expr = (DIWeek.new(Mon) | DIWeek.new(Wed) | DIWeek.new(Fri)) & REDay.new(8,00,11,00)
  schedule.add(north_event, north_expr)
  south_event = Event.new("south side")
  south_expr = (DIWeek.new(Tue) | DIWeek.new(Thu)) & REDay.new(11,30,14,00)      
  schedule.add(south_event, south_expr)
  reminder = Reminder.new(schedule, MailServer.new)
  while true
    sleep 15.minutes
    reminder.run Time.now
  end



=.....FINISH ME!......


<em>See Also:</em>

* Fowler's recurring event pattern[http://martinfowler.com/apsupp/recurring.pdf]

* Other temporal patterns[http://martinfowler.com/ap2/timeNarrative.html]
