= Temporal Expressions Tutorial

Based on a pattern[http://martinfowler.com/apsupp/recurring.pdf]
created by Martin Fowler, temporal expressions define points or ranges
in time using <em>set expressions</em>. This means, an application
developer can precisely describe recurring events without resorting to
hacking out a big-ol' nasty enumerated list of dates.

For example, say you wanted to schedule an event that occurred
annually on the last Thursday of every August. You might start out by
doing something like this:

  require 'date'

  some_dates = [Date.new(2002,8,29),Date.new(2003,8,28),Date.new(2004,8,26)]

  ...etc.

This is fine for two or three years, but what about for thirty years?
What if you want to say every Monday, Tuesday and Friday, between 3
and 5pm for the next fifty years? *Ouch*.

As Fowler notes in his paper, TemporalExpressions(<tt>TE</tt>s for
short) provide a simple pattern language for defining a given set of
dates and/or times. They can be 'mixed-and- matched' as necessary,
providing an incremental, modular and expanding expressive power.

Alrighty, then...less talkin', more tutorin'!

=== Example 1
<b>Define An Expression That Says: 'the last Thursday in August'</b>

  1   require 'runt'
  2   require 'date'
  3
  4   last_thursday = DIMonth.new(Last_of,Thursday)
  5
  6   august = REYear.new(8)
  7
  8   expr = last_thursday & august
  9
  10  expr.include?(Date.new(2002,8,29)) #Thurs 8/29/02 => true
  11  expr.include?(Date.new(2003,8,28)) #Thurs 8/28/03 => true
  12  expr.include?(Date.new(2004,8,26)) #Thurs 8/26/04 => true
  13  expr.include?(Date.new(2004,3,18)) #Thurs 3/18/04 => true
  14
  15  expr.include?(Date.new(2004,8,27)) #Fri 8/27/04 => false

A couple things are worth noting before we move on to more complicated
expressions. 

Clients use temporal expressions by creating specific instances
(DIMonth == day in month, REYear == range each year) and then,
optionally, combining them using various familiar operators 
<tt>( & , | , - )</tt>.

Semantically, the '&' operator on line 8 behaves much like the
standard Ruby short-circuit operator '&&'. However, instead of
returning a boolean value, a new composite <tt>TE</tt> is instead
created and returned. This new expression is the logical
intersection of everything matched by <b>both</b> arguments '&'.

In the example above, line  4:


    last_thursday = DIMonth.new(Last_of,Thursday)


will match the last Thursday of <b>any</b> month and line 6:


    august = REYear.new(8)


will match <b>any</b> date or date range occurring within the month of
August. Thus, combining them, you have 'the last Thursday' <b>AND</b>
'the month of August'.

By contrast:


    expr = DIMonth.new(Last_of,Thursday) | REYear.new(8)


will all match dates and ranges occurring within 'the last Thursday'
<b>OR</b> 'the month of August'.


Now what? Beginning on line 11, you can see that calling the
<tt>#include?</tt> method will let you know whether the expression you've
defined includes a given date (or, in some cases, a range, or another
TE). This is much like the way you use the standard <tt>Range#include?</tt>.

=== Example 2
<b>Define: 'Street Cleaning Rules/Alternate Side Parking in NYC'</b>

In his paper[http://martinfowler.com/apsupp/recurring.pdf], Fowler
uses Boston parking regulations to illustrate some examples. Since I'm
from New York City, and Boston-related examples might cause an
allergic reaction, I'll use NYC's street cleaning and parking
calendar[http://www.nyc.gov/html/dot/html/motorist/scrintro.html#street]
instead. Since I'm not <em>completely</em> insane, I'll only use a
small subset of the City's actual rules.

On my block, parking is prohibited on the north side of the street
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday between the hours of 8am to 11am, and on
Tuesday and Thursday from 11:30am to 2pm

Hmmm...let's start by selecting days in the week.

Monday <b>OR</b> Wednesday <b>OR</b> Friday:
    
    mon_wed_fri = DIWeek.new(Mon) | DIWeek.new(Wed) | DIWeek.new(Fri)
    
    #Sanity check     
    mon_wed_fri.include?( DateTime.new(2004,3,10,19,15) )     # Wed => true
    mon_wed_fri.include?( DateTime.new(2004,3,14,9,00) )      # Sun => false
    
8am to 11am: 

    eight_to_eleven = REDay.new(8,00,11,00)

combine the two:
    
    expr1 = mon_wed_fri & eight_to_eleven

and, logically speaking, we now have '(Mon <b>OR</b> Wed <b>OR</b> Fri) 
<b>AND</b> (8am to 11am)'. We're halfway there. 

Tuesdays and Thursdays:

    tues_thurs = DIWeek.new(Tue) | DIWeek.new(Thu)

11:30am to 2pm:
    eleven_thirty_to_two = REDay.new(11,30,14,00)

    #Sanity check
    eleven_thirty_to_two.include?( DateTime.new(2004,3,8,12,00) )   # Noon => true
    eleven_thirty_to_two.include?( DateTime.new(2004,3,11,00,00) )  # Midnite => false

    expr2 = tues_thurs & eleven_thirty_to_two

<tt>expr2</tt> says '(Tues <b>OR</b> Thurs) <b>AND</b> (11:30am to 2pm)'.

and finally:

    ticket = expr1 | expr2


Or, logically, ((Mon <b>OR</b> Wed <b>OR</b> Fri) <b>AND</b> (8am to
11am)) <b>OR</b> ((Tues OR Thurs) <b>AND</b> (11:30am to 2pm))


Let's re-write this without all the noise:


    expr1 = (DIWeek.new(Mon) | DIWeek.new(Wed) | DIWeek.new(Fri)) & REDay.new(8,00,11,00)
    
    expr2 = (DIWeek.new(Tue) | DIWeek.new(Thu)) & REDay.new(11,30,14,00)
    
    ticket = expr1 | expr2


    ticket.include?( DateTime.new(2004,3,11,12,15) )  # => true
    
    ticket.include?( DateTime.new(2004,3,10,9,15) )   # => true
    
    ticket.include?( DateTime.new(2004,3,10,8,00) )   # => true
    
    ticket.include?( DateTime.new(2004,3,11,1,15) )   # => false
    

Sigh...now if I can only get my dad to remember this...


These are simple examples, but they demonstrate how temporal
expressions can be used instead of an enumerated list of date values
to define patterns of recurrence. There are many other temporal
expressions, and, more importantly,  once you get the hang of it, it's
easy to write your own.

Fowler's paper[http://martinfowler.com/apsupp/recurring.pdf] also goes
on to describe another element of this pattern: the <tt>Schedule</tt>.
See the schedule tutorial[http://runt.rubyforge.org/doc/files/doc/tutorial_schedule_rdoc.html] for details.

<em>See Also:</em>

* Fowler's recurring event pattern[http://martinfowler.com/apsupp/recurring.pdf]

* Other temporal patterns[http://martinfowler.com/ap2/timeNarrative.html]
