= Sugar Tutorial

<em> This tutorial assumes you are familiar with use of the Runt API to
create temporal expressions. If you're unfamiliar with how and why to write
temporal expressions, take a look at the temporal expression 
tutorial[http://runt.rubyforge.org/doc/files/doc/tutorial_te_rdoc.html].</em>

Starting with version 0.7.0, Runt provides some syntactic sugar for creating 
temporal expressions. Runt also provides a builder class for which can be
used to create expressions in a more readable way than simply using :new.

First, let's look at some of the new shorcuts for creating individual
expressions. If you look at the lib/runt/sugar.rb file you find that the
Runt module has been re-opened and some nutty stuff happens when 
:method_missing is called.

For example, if you've included the Runt module, you can now create a
DIWeek expression by calling a method whose name matches the following
pattern:

    /^(sunday|monday|tuesday|wednesday|thursday|friday|saturday)$/

So

  tuesday

is equivalent to

  DIWeek.new(Tuesday)

Here's a quick summary of patterns and the expressions they create.

=== REDay

<b>regex</b>::           /^(daily_)(\d{1,2})_(\d{2})([ap]m)_to_(\d{1,2})_(\d{2})([ap]m)$/

<b>example</b>::         daily_8_30am_to_10_00pm  

<b>action</b>::          REDay.new(8,30,22,00)

=== REWeek

<b>regex</b>::           /^weekly_(sunday|monday|tuesday|wednesday|thursday|friday|saturday)\_to\_(sunday|monday|tuesday|wednesday|thursday|friday|saturday)$/

<b>example</b>::         weekly_wednesday_to_friday  

<b>action</b>::          REWeek.new(Wednesday, Friday)

=== REMonth

<b>regex</b>::          /^monthly_(\d{1,2})(?:st|nd|rd|th)\_to\_(\d{1,2})(?:st|nd|rd|th)$/

<b>example</b>::        monthly_2nd_to_24th 

<b>action</b>::         REMonth.new(2,24) 

=== REYear

<b>regex</b>::          /^yearly_(january|february|march|april|may|june|july|august|september|october|november|december)_(\d{1,2})\_to\_(january|february|march|april|may|june|july|august|september|october|november|december)_(\d{1,2})

<b>example</b>::        yearly_may_31_to_september_1

<b>action</b>::         REYear.new(May,31,September,1)

=== DIWeek

<b>regex</b>::          /^(sunday|monday|tuesday|wednesday|thursday|friday|saturday)$/

<b>example</b>::        friday 

<b>action</b>::         DIWeek.new(Friday) 

=== DIMonth

<b>regex</b>::          /^(first|second|third|fourth|last|second_to_last)_(sunday|monday|tuesday|wednesday|thursday|friday|saturday)$/

<b>example</b>::        last_friday 

<b>action</b>::         DIMonth.new(Last,Friday) 

Now let's look at the new ExpressionBuilder class. This class uses some simple methods and instance_eval to allow one to create composite tempooral expressions in a more fluid style than :new and friends. The idea is that you define a block where method calls add to a composite expression using either "and", "or", or "not".  

    # Create a new builder
    b = ExpressionBuilder.new
    
    # Call define with a block
    expression = d.define do
      on REDay.new(8,45,9,30)       
      on DIWeek.new(Friday)              # "And"
      possibly DIWeek.new(Saturday)      # "Or"
      except DIMonth.new(Last, Friday)   # "Not"
    end

    # expression = "Daily 8:45am to 9:30 and Fridays or Saturday except not the last Friday of the month"

Hmmm, this is not really an improvement over


      REDay.new(8,45,9,30) & DIWeek.new(Friday) | DIWeek.new(Saturday) - DIMonth.new(Last, Friday)

I know, let's try the new constructor aliases defined above!


